---
layout: paper
title: "Scaling Microfluidics to Complex, Dynamic Protocols"

type: "publication"
authors: ["mwillsey", "ashsteph", "cnt", "bichlien", "karin", "luis"]
venue: "ICCAD 2019"
venue_url: "https://iccad.com/event_details?id=283-9-B"
note: "Invited Paper"

tag: [conference, invited]

links:
  pdf: "/assets/2019-iccad-puddle.pdf"

bib: |
  @inproceedings{willsey2019scaling,
    title = {Scaling Microfluidics to Complex, Dynamic Protocols},
    author = {
      Max Willsey and
      Ashley P. Stephenson and
      Chris Takahashi and
      Bichlien H. Nguyen and
      Sarang Joshi and
      Karin Strauss and
      Luis Ceze
    },
    booktitle = {
      Proceedings of the
      International Conference on Computer-Aided Design 2019
    },
    series = {ICCAD '19},
    month = {11},
    year = {2019},
    location = {Westminster, CO, USA},
    publisher = {IEEE},
  }
---

## Abstract

Microfluidic devices promise to automate wetlab procedures by
manipulating small chemical or biological samples. We are developing a
full-stack microfluidic automation platform that allows and allows
users to scale up the complexity of microfluidic programming,
encouraging them to mix fluidic manipulations with traditional
programming.

Puddle is a runtime system that provides a high-level API for
microfluidic manipulations. It manages fluidic resources dynamically,
allowing programmers to freely mix regular computation with
microfluidics, resulting in more expressive programs. It also provides
real-time error correction through a computer vision system, allowing
robust execution on cheaper digital microfluidic hardware.

We have been running Puddle on PurpleDrop, a new digital microfluidic
device that is affordable and has novel features such as fully
automated input/output of fluids. With this combination, we have
demonstrated PCR with automated replenishment, a DNA sequencing
preparation protocol, and the complete retrieval of digital data
stored in dehydrated spots of DNA on the deviceâ€™s surface.

Going forward, we see Puddle and PurpleDrop as part of a platform for
further research. PurpleDrop is affordable and extensible, which makes
a compelling case for adding new peripherals or even scaling out by
connecting multiple devices. And Puddle provides a flexible and
abstract programming model that could enable microfluidic programs to
run on different hardware targets (DMF or liquid handling robots), or
even a combination thereof.
